README.md, before:

# EGBE
EGBE is an emulator for running GameBoy games on Linux.  Written in C with [SDL 2.0](https://www.libsdl.org/).  Currently supports...
- A handful of commercial games
- Persistent SRAM
- Save states
- Video RAM visualization
- Local link cable emulation
- Remote link cable emulation via [cURL](https://curl.haxx.se/) or [libwebsockets](https://libwebsockets.org/)
  - See [EGBE Link Hub](https://github.com/ssh-esoteric/egbe-link-hub) for a sample server implementation
  - A public version is available at [https://egbe.esoteric.website/links/](https://egbe.esoteric.website/links/)
- Ruby debugger

#### Samples

`SERIAL=local ./egbe tetris.gb`

![alt](https://egbe.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/samples/egbe-tetris-2p.png)

`GBC=1 SERIAL=local CART1=crystal.gbc CART2=gold.gbc BOOT=sameboy_cgb.bin ./egbe`

![alt](https://egbe.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/samples/egbe-crystal-2p.png)

## Controls

| Controls        |               |
| -------------   |:------------- |
| Arrow Keys      | Up, Down, Left, Right
| A               | A
| D               | B
| Right Shift     | Select
| Enter/Return    | Start
| **Save States** |               |
| F1 - F4         | Select save state 1 - 4
| F5              | Save state
| F8              | Load state
| **Audio**       |               |
| 1               | Toggle Square 1 audio channel
| 2               | Toggle Square 2 audio channel
| 3               | Toggle Wave audio channel
| 4               | Toggle Noise audio channel
| **Extra**       |               |
| Q, Escape       | Exit
| H               | Advance RTC by one hour
| J               | Advance RTC by one day
| Left Ctrl       | Swap focused Game Boy (with `SERIAL=local`)
| L               | Open remote link cable (with `SERIAL=curl` or `SERIAL=lws`; see requirements below)
| G               | Enter Ruby debugger shell (see requirements below)

## Runtime Flags

EGBE supports a number of environment variables to configure runtime behavior.

| Variable              | Description   |
| --------------------- |:------------- |
| `GBC=1`               | Launch EGBE in GBC mode
| `MUTED=1`             | Launch EGBE with audio muted (audio controls above still work)
| `BOOT=$file`          | Set path to Boot ROM file
| `CART=$file`          | Set path to ROM file
|                       | (Aliased as `BOOT1` and `CART1` below)
| **Local Link Cable**  |
| `SERIAL=local`        | Launch EGBE with two connected Game Boys (host on left, guest on right)
| `BOOT1=$file`         | Host: Set path to Boot ROM file
| `CART1=$file`         | Host: Set path to ROM file
| `BOOT2=$file`         | Guest: Set path to Boot ROM file (defaults to `BOOT1`)
| `CART2=$file`         | Guest: Set path to ROM file (defaults to `CART1`)
| **Remote Link Cable** |
| `SERIAL=curl`         | Enables remote link cables with cURL (see build requirements below)
| `SERIAL=lws`          | Enables remote link cables with libwebsockets (see build requirements below)
| `SERIAL_URL=$url`     | API endpoint to use for remote link cables

## Build Flags

At the moment, EGBE uses a simple Makefile for its build process.
Usually, any extra features that would require a new development library
(beyond SDL) can be enabled during the build process.

EX: `DEBUG=1 CURL=1 LWS=1 make -Bj9`

### Curl Link Cable Client

`CURL=1 make`

Requires the cURL development libraries and [JSON-C](https://github.com/json-c/json-c) libraries.

### LWS Link Cable Client

`LWS=1 make`

Requires the libwebsockets development libraries and [JSON-C](https://github.com/json-c/json-c) libraries.

### Ruby Debugger

`DEBUG=1 make`

Requires the Ruby development libraries.  When the debugger is first
launched, a file called `local.rb` will be loaded if it exists.

# License

GPL 3.0 or later

Commit message:

Add plugin system to clean up curl/lws/ruby deps
This change refactors some of the ugly, highly-coupled code in egbe.h
and the Makefile.  The plugin API is still a work in progress, as are
the responsibilities of egbe_application and egbe_gameboy.

Notably, the init/exit/call hooks in the plugin API were necessary to
support the Ruby plugin.  To get the debugger to work properly, Ruby's
API requires all further library calls to exist ON THE SAME STACK FRAME,
which makes a simple init/exit API insufficient.

This plugin framework also makes it possible to extract SDL into its own
plugin, so that other libraries could be used for video/audio/keyboard.
Maybe later.

README.md, after:

# EGBE
EGBE is an emulator for running GameBoy games on Linux.  Written in C with [SDL 2.0](https://www.libsdl.org/).  Currently supports...
- A handful of commercial games
- Persistent SRAM
- Save states
- Video RAM visualization
- Local link cable emulation
- Remote link cable emulation via [cURL](https://curl.haxx.se/) or [libwebsockets](https://libwebsockets.org/)
  - See [EGBE Link Hub](https://github.com/ssh-esoteric/egbe-link-hub) for a sample server implementation
  - A public version is available at [https://egbe.esoteric.website/links/](https://egbe.esoteric.website/links/)
- Ruby debugger

#### Samples

`SERIAL=local ./egbe tetris.gb`

![alt](https://egbe.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/samples/egbe-tetris-2p.png)

`GBC=1 SERIAL=local CART1=crystal.gbc CART2=gold.gbc BOOT=sameboy_cgb.bin ./egbe`

![alt](https://egbe.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/samples/egbe-crystal-2p.png)

## Controls

| Controls        |               |
| -------------   |:------------- |
| Arrow Keys      | Up, Down, Left, Right
| A               | A
| D               | B
| Right Shift     | Select
| Enter/Return    | Start
| **Save States** |               |
| F1 - F4         | Select save state 1 - 4
| F5              | Save state
| F8              | Load state
| **Audio**       |               |
| 1               | Toggle Square 1 audio channel
| 2               | Toggle Square 2 audio channel
| 3               | Toggle Wave audio channel
| 4               | Toggle Noise audio channel
| **Extra**       |               |
| Q, Escape       | Exit
| H               | Advance RTC by one hour
| J               | Advance RTC by one day
| Left Ctrl       | Swap focused Game Boy (with `SERIAL=local`)
| L               | Open remote link cable (with `SERIAL=$plugin`; see requirements below)
| G               | Enter debugger shell (with `DEBUG=$plugin`; see requirements below)

## Runtime Flags

EGBE supports a number of environment variables to configure runtime behavior.

| Variable              | Description   |
| --------------------- |:------------- |
| `GBC=1`               | Launch EGBE in GBC mode
| `MUTED=1`             | Launch EGBE with audio muted (audio controls above still work)
| `PLUGIN_DEBUG=1`      | Print detailed information about discovered plugins
| `BOOT=$file`          | Set path to Boot ROM file
| `CART=$file`          | Set path to ROM file
|                       | (Aliased as `BOOT1` and `CART1` below)
| **Debugger**          |
| `DEBUG=$plugin`       | Use `ruby`/other plugin to enable a debug shell
| **Local Link Cable**  |
| `SERIAL=local`        | Launch EGBE with two connected Game Boys (host on left, guest on right)
| `BOOT1=$file`         | Host: Set path to Boot ROM file
| `CART1=$file`         | Host: Set path to ROM file
| `BOOT2=$file`         | Guest: Set path to Boot ROM file (defaults to `BOOT1`)
| `CART2=$file`         | Guest: Set path to ROM file (defaults to `CART1`)
| **Remote Link Cable** |
| `SERIAL=$plugin`      | Use `curl`/`lws`/other plugin to enable remote link cables
| `SERIAL_URL=$url`     | API endpoint to use for remote link cables

## Build Process + Plugins

At the moment, EGBE uses a simple Makefile for its build process.
Additional functionality (particularly that requiring other libraries) may be included through a plugin system defined in `egbe_plugin_api.h`.
On launch, EGBE will attempt to load any plugins matching `./plugins/*/*.so`.

EX: `make -Bj9 ruby curl egbe && DEBUG=ruby SERIAL=curl ./egbe`

The following plugins are included by default:

### Curl Link Cable Client

`make curl egbe && SERIAL=curl SERIAL_URL=$url ./egbe`

Requires the [JSON-C](https://github.com/json-c/json-c) and cURL development libraries.

### LWS Link Cable Client

`make lws egbe && SERIAL=lws SERIAL_URL=$url ./egbe`

Requires the [JSON-C](https://github.com/json-c/json-c) and libwebsockets development libraries.

### Ruby Debugger

`make ruby egbe && DEBUG=ruby ./egbe`

Requires the Ruby development libraries.
When the debugger is first launched, a file called `local.rb` will be loaded if it exists.

# License

GPL 3.0 or later
